Killed Queries Epic Post (#28)
leahtsdudley/testing: kq_epic_post.md

## The Fellowship of the Query: The Journey to a Greener Scorecard

#### TL;DR

The Pull Requests team resolved 109 killed/slow queries to achieve a green scorecard.

---
### The Quest

> When SQL queries take more than 2 seconds they are considered "slow" and if they take more than 10 seconds they are "killed". Killed queries mean pages fail to load and database resources are wasted. Our [scorecard](https://catalog.githubapp.com/services/github/pull_requests/scorecards/mysql-database-usage), sets a stringent expectation of "_no killed queries on [primary/replica] database hosts generated by this service_". Supporting the full Pull Requests experience and all that it entails means a lot of queries across web and API calls. With availability as a priority, we began an epic to fix problematic queries and get our scorecard to green.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
SQL queries that take more than 2 seconds are considered slow and if they take more than 10 seconds they are killed. Killed queries exceed the limits for our request-response cycle and therefore mean that requests across our REST api, GraphQL api, and browser experience fail, and additionally wasting compute and database resources. Our [scorecard](https://catalog.githubapp.com/services/github/pull_requests/scorecards/mysql-database-usage), sets a stringent expectation of "_no killed queries on [primary/replica] database hosts generated by this service_". Supporting the full Pull Requests experience and all that it entails means a lot of queries across web and API calls. With availability as a priority, we began an epic to fix problematic queries and get our scorecard to green.
```

This is a heavier-handed edit than I meant to suggest, but I just rolled with it. I really meant to strongly suggested that you can remove the quotation marks around `"slow"` and `"killed"`. The queries _are_ slow and _are_ killed because they've exceeded our request/response timing threshold.

Author: My intent with the quotes is to show that these terms are labels and not solely descriptions. Maybe writing them as `slow` and `killed` will make that clearer.

### Gather your equipment
The first step in any valiant quest is to study your map and pack your bag. For this epic, we relied on several powerful tools.

> 1. We often learn about problematic queries from automatically generated issues in the [mysql-database-usage repo](https://github.com/github/mysql-database-usage/issues?q=is%3Aissue%20state%3Aopen%20github%2Fpull_requests%20). This data allowed us to track, focus, and prioritize.

Author: In this post I'm trying to be generally succinct where I can because I know it will mostly be skimmed and I'm not sure that extra detail here is necessary for the average reader. I do like the idea of explaining these issues as an entrypoint and will mention the timing. But, as far as I could tell, they aren't updated on the same day but are re-evaluated every 7 days from when the issue opened. I also mention the fingerprint/digests in the next section so it does get noted.

> 2. The mighty `EXPLAIN` was invaluable for testing possible performance wins on [staging clones]([https://thehub.github.com/epd/engineering/dev-practicals/mysql/running-explain-against-production/](https://thehub.github.com/epd/engineering/dev-practicals/mysql/running-explain-against-production/)) and measuring actual output on [a prod console](https://thehub.github.com/epd/engineering/dev-practicals/mysql/running-explain-against-production/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. We were able to leverage the `EXPLAIN` statement for testing possible performance wins directly against problematic queries on [staging clones]([https://thehub.github.com/epd/engineering/dev-practicals/mysql/running-explain-against-production/](https://thehub.github.com/epd/engineering/dev-practicals/mysql/running-explain-against-production/)) and measuring actual output in [a production console](https://thehub.github.com/epd/engineering/dev-practicals/mysql/running-explain-against-production/).
```

> 3. We ran multiple [Scientist](https://github.com/github/scientist) experiments allowing us to iterate quickly and validate our changes while ensuring parity.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. [Scientist](https://github.com/github/scientist) allowed us to compare the performance of existing queries against our candidate improvements and validate that those candidates' output. This meant we could iterate safely, have confidence in our changes, and ensure parity with the existing code before making our changes permanent.
```

5. **Automations aren't perfect**. Killed query issues are regularly updated via automation with current performance data, which we used to determine impact and set priorities. Like any system, it's susceptible to bugs meaning that our data was delayed or inaccurate. It also can't tell when one query is a slight variation from another but fundamentally the same.

### Plan your adventure
With those challenges in mind, we gathered our fellowship and began to strategize. There were a couple of approaches we exploredw with the most common trait being a non-performant join on the `issues` table. Because pull requests continue to track their state with an issue under the hood, querying a pull request by its state required us to also query the `issues` table. This resulted in queries that looked something like this:
```
SELECT
    COUNT (*)
  FROM
    `pull_requests`
    , `issues`
  WHERE
    `pull_requests`.`repository_id` = ?
    AND (
      `pull_requests`.`user_hidden` = ?
      OR `pull_requests`.`user_id` = ?
    )
    AND `issues`.`state` = ?
    AND `issues`.`pull_request_id` = `pull_requests`.`id`
    AND `issues`.`repository_id` = `pull_requests`.`repository_id`
```

> The basic question here is "Why can't a pull request have its own state?". The answer seemed like a clear win. Put a `state` column on `pull_requests` and remove the expensive join on issues `state`. Easy peasy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This observation led to the basic but crucial question; "Why can't a pull request have its own state?". The answer seemed like a clear win. Putting a `state` column on `pull_requests` would remove the expensive join on issues `state`. Easy peasy.
```

### Face the challengers
Spoiler alert: It was not easy peasy.

#### Obstacle 1: The column that could not be named

> An issue can be one of two states - open or closed. The same is true for pull requests at the database level. However, at the model level, a pull request can have three states: open, closed, or merged, as determined by the [PullRequest#state method](https://github.com/github/github/blob/a18286f131f4dc80dcbab605938125fcd9ac509d/packages/pull_requests/app/models/pull_request.rb#L650-L654). The existence of this method blocked us from simply adding a `pull_requests.state` field. We briefly explored some workarounds for this naming conflict, however, the best solution ended up being the simplest one; choose a different column name. With `pull_requests.status` in place, we could continue on our way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An issue can be one of two states - open or closed. The same is true for pull requests at the database level. However, at the model level, a pull request can have three states: open, closed, or merged, as determined by the [PullRequest#state method](https://github.com/github/github/blob/a18286f131f4dc80dcbab605938125fcd9ac509d/packages/pull_requests/app/models/pull_request.rb#L650-L654). The existence of this method blocked us from simply adding a `pull_requests.state` field. We briefly explored some workarounds for this naming conflict, however, the best solution ended up being the simplest one; choose a different column name. We therefore chose to implement a `pull_requests.status` column. Once it was in place, we could continue on our way.
```

    AND `labels`.`repository_id` = `issues`.`repository_id`
  ORDER BY
    `pull_requests`.`id` DESC
```

Simply swapping `issues.state` for `pull_request.status` wasn't enough for these queries. Thus we explored other optimizations, including breaking out subqueries, forcing or ignoring an index, and reorganizing the query structure, none of which showed improvements[^labels]. We even considered storing label ids in a new column on `issues` to eliminate the extra joins, but that presented its own big lift that was far outside the scope of this epic.

So, like the dwarves in the mines of Moria, we dug deeper to determine _who_ was hitting these queries. Over a period of 30 days, we found that between the two queries, all calls were coming from only 4 users within 4 repos. More interestingly, all 4 users were GitHub apps mimicking merge queue functionality. One in particular was routinely causing around 10k events every 20 minutes. With this new information, our minds turned towards rate limiting. Unfortunately, rate limits are set based on individual app installations and cannot be applied by query fingerprint, so they were too blunt to deploy here.

> Not all slow and killed queries are equal and triaging is important. As a very small number of users were impacted, and because the lift would have been considerably high, we decided not to pursue this query at this time lest we awaken the Balrog.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ultimately, as a very small number of users were impacted, and because fully resolving the problems with this query would have taken an inordinate lift, we decided not to make this epic's completion contingent upon correcting this query lest we awaken the Balrog.
```

#### Obstacle 3: The road goes ever on

> To populate our new `pull_requests.status`column, we needed to backfill with the data from `issues.state`. The `pull_requests` table is _big_ so we knew we were in for a hefty process. What we didn't expect is that the transition would take 604 hours of run time across a period of 33 days, including dry runs. Within that, we had to maintain vigilance as we encountered unexplained failures that would interrupt the process, requiring us to manually restart. Finally, when we thought our toil had borne its reward, we were faced with some confusing data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To be able to effectively use our new `pull_requests.status` column, we needed to both ensure that it was being dual-written to as new pull requests were created, and backfill the historical data from `issues.state` prior to dual writing beginning. The `pull_requests` table is _big_ so we knew we were in for a hefty process. What we didn't expect is that the transition would take 604 hours of run time across a period of 33 days, including dry runs. Within that, we had to maintain vigilance as we encountered unexplained failures that would interrupt the process, requiring us to manually restart. Finally, when we thought our toil had borne its reward, we were faced with some confusing data.
```

While the logging indicated everything had run as expected, Kusto, datadot, and analytics hosts suggested the backfill had missed some pull requests[^backfill]. This was potentially an enormous setback. To find a reliable source of truth, we reached out to several teams and finally learned that what we needed was a new full snapshot of the table. With that done, we were able to determine that the backfill was mostly successful and the remaining group of pull requests missing `status` data were from the period after dual writing was introduced.

#### Obstacle 4: But they were all of them deceived, for another bug was made

> With more confidence in the backfilling, we began fixing our dual writing bug; ([a saga in itself](https://github.com/github/pull-requests/issues/15850)). Our initial implementation set a pull request's `status` at the same time as an `issue` state via an existing ActiveRecord callback on the issue[^callback]. The unexpected flaw was that an issue is created just before its associated pull request. Our first thought was to move this into its own callback on the pull request, but we decided to give orchestrations a try after some feedback from the Issues team[^orch]. But we still encountered new mismatched records as there now a race condition between two orchestration processes and further iterations on this path caused deadlocks. Ultimately, the solution involved a callback on the issue that was localized to update pull request `status` whenever an issue's `state` changed.

Author: I'm not sure I understand. Is the part you suggested not explaining what the flaw was?

- _Contextualize that the improvement improved customer experience_

- _Point out that the same queries run without timing out after_

- _List of common query killers?_

### Gather your equipment
The first step in any valiant quest is to study your map. So, we started with the basics:
- What are the queries we need to solve?
- Where are they originating?
- How many times are they happening per week?
- How long do they take on average?

We learn about problematic queries from automatically generated issues in the [mysql-database-usage repo](https://github.com/github/mysql-database-usage/issues?q=is%3Aissue%20state%3Aopen%20github%2Fpull_requests%20). With the data laid out, we could focus and prioritize. So just work your way from the top, right? We soon found there were a few snags to this seemingly simple approach.

1. **The scorecard isn't static**. An existing query might be improved by an indirect change, or a new problematic query could arise from updated code or processes. With moving targets we needed to keep a closer eye on which queries were impacting us the most.

> 2. **Query identifiers change**. Each query is attached to a `fingerprint` as a unique identifiera and its goal is to group similar queries that are structured the same way, but contain different IDs and field values. But sometimes a query's fingerprint changes. For example, in late November 2024, several of our affected queries appeared to have been solved, but at the same time new issues were being created with identical query structures and entry points but new fingerprints, [which we're tracking here](https://github.com/github/mysql-database-scorecard/issues/57). This meant that we had to be vigilant about cross-referencing old query issues to new ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. **Query identifiers change**. Each query is attached to a `fingerprint` as a unique identifier and its goal is to group similar queries that are structured the same way, but contain different IDs and field values. But, sometimes a query's fingerprint changes. For example, in late November 2024, several of our affected queries appeared to have been solved, but at the same time new issues were being created with identical query structures and entry points but with new fingerprints, [which we're tracking here](https://github.com/github/mysql-database-scorecard/issues/57). This meant that we had to be vigilant about cross-referencing old query issues to new ones.
```

### Plan your adventure
With those challenges in mind, we gathered our fellowship began to strategize. There were a couple of approaches we explore, but the most common trait among these killed queries was a non-performant join on the `issues` table. Because pull requests continue to track their state with an issue under the hood, querying a pull request by its state required us to also query the `issues` table. This resulted in queries that looked something like this:
```
SELECT
    COUNT (*)
  FROM
    `pull_requests`
    , `issues`
  WHERE
    `pull_requests`.`repository_id` = ?
    AND (
      `pull_requests`.`user_hidden` = ?
      OR `pull_requests`.`user_id` = ?
    )
    AND `issues`.`state` = ?
    AND `issues`.`pull_request_id` = `pull_requests`.`id`
    AND `issues`.`repository_id` = `pull_requests`.`repository_id`
```
The basic question here is "Why can't a pull request have its own state?". The answer seemed like a clear win. Put a `state` column on `pull_requests` and remove the expensive join on issues `state`. Easy peasy.

### Face the challengers

> Spoiler alert: It was not easy peasy. Like the treacherous paths of Caradhras, we encountered dead ends that pushed us to try other routes.

Reviewer: Love the opening for this, unsure if Caradhras is too distinct/nice of a reference though.

Author: I've been on the edge of "Is this too many/too specific references?". I mean, technically, it's mentioned and shown in the movies (the part where they're hiking up the snowy mountain), but unless you're a real nerd like me, you might have missed that. Might ponder if there's a more generic reference I can make here.

To populate our new `pull_requests.status`column, we needed to backfill with the data from issues.state. `pull_requests` is a _big_ table, so we knew we were in for a hefty process. What we didn't expect is that the transition would take 604 hours of run time across a period of 33 days, including dry runs. Within that, we had to maintain vigilance as we encountered unexplained failures that would interrupt the process, requiring us to manually restart. Finally, when we thought our toil had borne its reward, we were faced with some confusing data.

While the logging indicated everything had run as expected, Kusto, datadot, and analytics hosts suggested the backfill had missed some pull requests[^2]. This was potentially an enormous setback. To find a reliable source of truth, we reached out to several teams and finally learned that what we needed was a new full snapshot of the table. With that done, we were able to determine that the backfill was mostly successful and the remaining group of pull requests missing `status` data were from the period after dual writing was introduced.

#### Obstacle 4: But they were all of them deceived, for another bug was made

> And so we began fixing our dual writing bug, [a saga in itself](https://github.com/github/pull-requests/issues/15850). Our initial implementation set a pull request's status at the same time that an issue state was set via an existing ActiveRecord callback on the issue[^3]. The unexpected flaw was related to how an issue is created just before its associated pull request. Our first thought was to move this into its own callback on the pull request, but we decided to give orchestrations a try after some feedback from the Issues team[^4]. But we still encountered new mismatched records as there now a race condition between two orchestration processes and further iterations on this path caused deadlocks. Ultimately, the solution involved a callback on the issue that was localized to update pull request `status` whenever an issue's `state` changed.

Reviewer: Unsure what to recommend here, but starting with `And so we began fixing our dual writing bug,..` threw me/felt disjointed. I think I'd personally start with how we noticed a dual writing bug?

> And yet, the wraiths were still at our heels. Due to the multiple iterations of bug fixing, we still had out-of-sync pull request records. Instead of re-running the full transition, we took a more targeted approach by creating a transition that iterated over a CSV of only remaining mismatched records.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And yet, the wraiths were still at our heels. Due to the multiple iterations of dual-writing bug fixing, we now had out-of-sync pull request records, and we still had cleanup from the run of the initial transition to contend with. Instead of re-running the full transition, we took a more targeted approach by creating a transition that allowed us to iterated over targeted CSVs of the remaining records that were either mismatched, or never backfilled.
```

> ## Super cool title that I’ll figure out later

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Lord of the (Killed) Queries
```

3. **Benchmarks change**. Killed query issues are regularly updated via automation with current performance data. This was one of the benchmarks used to determine impact and set priorities. Twice during this epic we noticed that we weren't seeing updates from the bot for several weeks. This meant that we couldn't be sure if our data was accurate or current. Eventually, fixes were made so that issues were updating again, but in the interim, we couldn't easily determine how to find that information manually.

### Plan your adventure
With those challenges in mind, we began to strategize. We started by grouping our initial set of queries by possible solutions, including [batching](https://github.com/github/pull-requests/issues/14462) and [adding new indexes](https://github.com/github/pull-requests/issues/14461). However, there’s one bucket that stands out as the most fraught and the most impactful: our dependency on the `issues.state` field.

> A common trait among these killed queries was a non-performant join on the `issues` table. For reasons lost to time, pull requests still depended on issues to determine their state. This resulted in queries that looked something like this:

Author: TIL! I guess what I meant was "For reasons _before my time_".

```
SELECT
    COUNT (*)
  FROM
    `pull_requests`
    , `issues`
  WHERE
    `pull_requests`.`repository_id` = ?
    AND (
      `pull_requests`.`user_hidden` = ?
      OR `pull_requests`.`user_id` = ?
    )
    AND `pull_requests`.`merged_at` IS NULL
    AND `issues`.`state` = ?
    AND `issues`.`pull_request_id` = `pull_requests`.`id`
    AND `issues`.`repository_id` = `pull_requests`.`repository_id` LIMIT ?
```
The most basic question here is "Why can't a pull request have its own state?". The answer seemed like a clear win. Put a `state` column on `pull_requests` and remove the expensive join on issues `state`. Easy peasy.

### Face the challengers
Spoiler alert: It was not easy peasy. It was not even in the same realm as easy peasy. Like a labyrinth, the more turns we took, the more twists we discovered.

> #### Obstacle 1: When is a state not a state

Author: I really want a Lord of the Rings reference here since the other "Obstacle" titles have one, but I haven't thought of one yet.

```
SELECT
    `pull_requests`.`id`
  FROM
    `pull_requests`
    , `issues`
    , `issues_labels`
    , `labels`
  WHERE
    `labels`.`lowercase_name` IN (
      . . .
    )
    AND `pull_requests`.`repository_id` = ?
    AND (
      `pull_requests`.`user_hidden` = ?
      OR `pull_requests`.`user_id` = ?
    )
    AND `issues`.`state` = ?
    AND `issues`.`pull_request_id` = `pull_requests`.`id`
    AND `issues`.`repository_id` = `pull_requests`.`repository_id`
    AND `issues_labels`.`issue_id` = `issues`.`id`
    AND `labels`.`id` = `issues_labels`.`label_id`
    AND `labels`.`repository_id` = `issues`.`repository_id`
  ORDER BY
    `pull_requests`.`id` DESC LIMIT ?
```

Simply swapping `issues.state` for `pull_request.status` wasn't enough for these queries; they were still timing out. Thus we explored other optimizations, including breaking out subqueries, forcing or ignoring an index, and reorganizing the query structure, none of which showed improvements[^1]. We even considered storing label ids in a new column on `issues` to eliminate the extra joins, but that presented its own big lift that seemed far outside the scope of this epic.

> So, like the dwarves in the mines of Moria, we dug deeper to determine _who_ was hitting these queries. Over a period of 30 days, we found that between the two queries, all calls were coming from only 4 users within 4 repos. More interestingly, all 4 users were GitHub apps mimicking merge queue functionality. One in particular was causing around 10k events routinely every 20 minutes. With this new information, our minds turned towards rate limiting. Unfortunately, rate limits are set based on individual app installations and cannot be applied by query fingerprint, so they were too blunt to deploy here.

Reviewer 2: > So, like the dwarves in the mines of Moria,

I am 💯 here for these literary references. I don't get them because I'm not nearly as well-read as you but +1

Author: 😆 I considered adding a disclaimer at the top like "Warning: Lots of Lord of the Rings references incoming". 💍

> Once we'd exhausted our best efforts, we ultimately decided to forgo this particular quest lest we awaken the Balrog. Due to the very small group of affected users, we determined that the estimated effort to continue was not worth the potential impact. Instead, there is an open discussion about updating our scorecard tooling to exempt these queries from our scorecards moving forward.

Reviewer 2: Framing is important here!

The way you've told this story comes off as "this was hard, and it was only affecting four users, and so we decided not to do it."

That comes off as though you decided it was too hard and gave up.

But what if, instead, you framed it more like this:

"Not all slow and killed queries are equal, and triaging is important. For instance, for this particular query fingerprint we found that not only was issue state being queried, but labels were too. There were further options for this query, like [insert potential other solutions here], but because a very small number of users were impacted, and because the lift would have been considerably high, we've decided not to pursue this query at this time."

It's still basically telling the same story but there's more of a subtext of "we carefully considered it and decided not to pursue at this time"

Also: I think it's a useful lesson in critically looking at the scorecard. Scorecards work for us, not the other way around, and it's okay to decide to exempt queries in some cases.

> #### Obstacle 3: The road goes ever on

Reviewer 2: In obstacle 2 you got into a side story about a particular query you ultimately decided to exempt.

Organizationally I would recommend keeping this story focused exclusively on the state extraction journey, and extract out the other side quests.[^1]

In fact: I think that the story of adding a PRs state column is worthy of its own post altogether!

[^1]: yes, I realize that this is really rich coming from me if you've ever heard me try to tell a story out loud without going off on a million tangents. That's why I love writing! I get to edit the tangents and restructure before I share 😂

Reviewer 2: addendum: as I keep reading through the state column extraction journey I am even more convinced it's worthy of an entire post (and probably needs to be edited down to under 750 words as its own post)

Reviewer: I agree with Aaron here in general. I'd recommend re-working the `### Plan your adventure` section to talk generally about observing the non-performant joins to issues as a theme, and then specifically have dedicated sub-sections under that talking about how we thought to address both `issues.state` and the join to labels thorough issues. You could even reorder things so that you talk about the labels join first, and then issues state so that things can flow into the full issues.state story.

To populate our new `pull_requests.status`column, we needed to backfill with the data from issues.state. `pull_requests` is a _big_ table, so we knew we were in for a hefty process. What we didn't expect is that the transition would take 604 hours of run time across a period of 33 days, including dry runs. Within that, we had to maintain vigilance as we encountered unexplained failures that would interrupt the process, requiring us to manually restart. Finally, when we thought our toil had borne its reward, we were faced with some confusing data.

> While the logging indicated everything had run as expected, Kusto, datadot, and analytics hosts suggested the backfill had missed some pull requests[^2]. This was potentially an enormous setback. To find a reliable source of truth, we reached out to several teams and finally learned that what we needed was a new full snapshot of the table. With that done, we were able to determine that the backfill was mostly successful and the remaining group of pull requests missing `status` data were from the period after dual writing was introduced.

Reviewer 2: This is actually a really useful learning and it might be worth linking to references of the differences in the snapshot types and what was wrong with the snapshot you had!

Author: I discovered we needed this from a response to asking in the data-engineering Slack channel, but I couldn't find any docs where it's mentioned.

#### Obstacle 4: But they were all of them deceived, for another bug was made

> And so we began fixing our dual writing bug, [a saga in itself](https://github.com/github/pull-requests/issues/15850). Our initial implementation set a pull request's status at the same time that an issue state was set via an existing ActiveRecord callback on the issue[^3]. The unexpected flaw with that was related to how an issue is created just before its associated pull request. Our first thought was to move this into its own callback on the pull request, but we decided to give orchestrations a try after some feedback from the Issues team[^4]. But we still encountered new mismatched records as there now a race condition between two orchestration processes and further iterations on this path caused deadlocks. Ultimately, the solution involved a callback on the issue that was localized to update pull request `status` whenever an issue's `state` changed. Phew.

Reviewer 2: it might be worth describing the advantage orchestrations were thought to bring, or at least a link to a document explaining the background of orchestrations!

Author: I found a thread where an Issues team member briefly explained why they're pushing back on adding callbacks, but I couldn't find any docs about the Orchestrations pattern in that context.

> And yet, the wraiths were still at our heels. Due to the multiple iterations of bug fixing, we had to run more transitions to update pull requests records. In one, we discovered that our use of Active Record lookups allowed for a gap between reading and writing and that direct queries were needed. In another, we learned how to be more targeted by creating a CSV of mismatched pull requests and iterating over them directly.

Reviewer 2: this line feels simultaneously too in the weeds but also leaving out pertinent details. Keep in mind that the audience here could be quite broad!

> In one, we discovered that our use of Active Record lookups allowed for a gap between reading and writing and that direct queries were needed.

I think this one needs to be clearer; I don't think the use of `ActiveRecord` specifically is the source of the problem; its sounds almost like you're describing a race condition with reading from replicas right after writing but I'm not 100%

> In another, we learned how to be more targeted by creating a CSV of mismatched pull requests and iterating over them directly.

this is similarly both overly detailed about one thing (creating the CSV) but not detailed enough about the root problem (which from context I gather is that there were still PRs whose status was out of sync with their issues' state column.

It's worth being really clear here: you found a small number of specific PRs whose status column needed syncing with their issues, so you built a second transition that took a CSV of PRs to synchronize instead of trying to re-run the whole transition.

Author: This is a good point. I think a general "had mismatches. made a csv. ran a transition" approach is probably sufficient here.

### Revel in your triumph

Though the quest was arduous and many shadows befell us, at last we reaped the harvest of victory. (_i hope :lolsob:_)

In this epic as we ran 12 [Scientist](https://github.com/github/scientist) experiments to validate our changes, some with multiple iterations.

_Results with ✨graphs✨_

### Reflect on your journey

This project spanned many months and thus there was a lot to learn.
1. Even if there are only a few people directly working on it at first, start a new public Slack channel dedicated solely to the project. This centralizes conversations and makes it easier to find history and share with others.
2. Communicate with other teams early if the work could span beyond your team. As these queries occur on a shared `issues-pull-requests` cluster, eventually the Issues team began work that overlapped with ours. If we'd started that conversation earlier we could have more quickly identified opportunities to collaborate.

> 3. Be careful with your feature flags. When we were troubleshooting the dual writing bugs, we opened a pull request to implement a new pathway while also removing the old way. On the surface that seemed like an efficient way to do it, but what we didn't consider was that the two ways were controlled by different feature flags. So there was a gap between when the old one was turned off and the new one was fully ramped up. This was a contributing factor to our record mismatches.

Reviewer 2: actually this is worth extracting out into its own post as a cautionary tale!

We very loudly beat the drum of "use feature flags" at GitHub as a way to reduce risk, but there are situations where indiscriminately throwing a feature flag at something might actually create a complex and nuanced problem that was otherwise not considered.

   
Additionally, this project generated some open questions for future development.

> 1. Currently, the queries section of a service's scorecard only passes if there are no killed/slow queries. Even one causes it to fail. Is there a way that we can make this more granular to better estimate impact and priority?

Reviewer 2: I think it's okay to be opinionated here and say that's too strict! 

Also: it would be worth opening up a discussion post and linking it here so that we could opine on it further.

> 2. Finding and verifying database records was difficult and left us with low confidence. Is there a better way to identify which source to use, how, and when?

Reviewer 2: Reading this I didn't really follow what you meant; can you elaborate?

> 3. Transitions can be tricky and we encountered several setbacks. How can we improve this process to allow for better troubleshooting?

Reviewer 2: omg yes it's been years since my last transition but I feel this a lot. Transitions are so demanding to perform; they are full of manual steps which means they're prone to human mistakes, and they require so much sustained executive function to see through. literally months! that's risky.
